>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY, JUNE 4:
REMEMBERING MUHAMMAD ALI AS THE
BOXING LEGEND DIES AT AGE 74.
>> ALL OF MY CRITICS, I TOLD YOU
ALL THAT I WAS THE GREATEST OF
ALL TIME.
>> Sreenivasan: A WEEK OF HEAVY
RAINS FLOODING PARTS OF THE
SOUTHWEST UNITED STATES AND
EUROPE; AND, VENEZUELA IN
CRISIS, WITH FOOD AND MEDICINE
SHORTAGES ACROSS THE COUNTRY.
NEXT, ON PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS AT
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING,
AND THANKS FOR JOINING US.
MUHAMMAD ALI CALLED HIMSELF "THE
GREATEST," AND MOST EVERYONE
AGREED.
THE BOXER DAZZLED IN THE RING,
WINNING OLYMPIC GOLD AND THE
HEAVYWEIGHT TITLE THREE TIMES,
AND DOMINATING HIS SPORT FOR TWO
DECADES.
OUTSIDE THE RING, ALI WAS A
CHARISMATIC PERSONALITY, A CIVIL
RIGHTS PIONEER, A FIGHTER FOR
HIS MUSLIM FAITH, AND AN ANTI-
WAR PROTESTER LATER EMBRACED BY
PRESIDENTS.
AS A SPORTS ICON, ALI BECAME
BIGGER THAN BABE RUTH AND AS
CONSEQUENTIAL AS JACKIE
ROBINSON, AND WAS ONE OF THE
MOST RECOGNIZABLE ATHLETES ON
THE PLANET.
ALI, WHO HAD SUFFERED FROM
PARKINSON'S DISEASE, DIED OF
SEPTIC SHOCK DUE TO UNSPECIFIED
NATURAL CAUSES LAST NIGHT AT A
HOSPITAL IN PHOENIX, ARIZONA.
HIS FAMILY PLANS A PUBLIC
FUNERAL NEXT FRIDAY IN ALI'S
HOMETOWN OF LOUISVILLE,
KENTUCKY, WITH FORMER PRESIDENT
BILL CLINTON DELIVERING A
EULOGY.
PRESIDENT BARACK OBAMA, WHO
KEEPS A PAIR OF ALI'S BOXING
GLOVES IN HIS PRIVATE STUDY NEXT
TO THE OVAL OFFICE, SAID
MUHAMMAD ALI BECAME "A
POWERFUL FORCE FOR PEACE AND
RECONCILIATION" WHO "SHOOK UP
THE WORLD, AND THE WORLD IS
BETTER FOR IT."
FIGHT NIGHT-- MIAMI BEACH,
FEBRUARY, 1964.
>> CLAY'S JAB IS STRONGER THAN
IT HAS BEEN AT ANY POINT IN THE
FIGHT.
>> Sreenivasan: CASSIUS CLAY--
THE FUTURE MUHAMMAD ALI--
HAMMERS AT SONNY LISTON,
HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMPION OF THE
WORLD.
CLAY IS A DECIDED UNDERDOG, BUT
HE POUNDS THE CHAMP INTO
SUBMISSION IN JUST SIX ROUNDS.
>> AT THE END OF THIS ROUND,
LISTON'S CORNER WILL CALL THE
DOCTOR TO THE RING AND, OVER THE
CHAMPION'S PROTEST, STOP THE
FIGHT.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW, CLAY IS
BOXING'S NEW HEAVYWEIGHT
CHAMPION.
>> CLAY IS PROCLAIMING, "I AM
THE GREATEST!
I'M THE KING!"
>> Sreenivasan: JUST THAT
QUICKLY, A UNIQUE FIGURE EMERGES
IN AMERICAN SPORT, AND WILL GO
ON TO BECOME A GLOBAL ICON.
>> I AM JUST LIKE OXYGEN.
I'M JUST LIKE OXYGEN.
I'M ALL OVER THE WORLD.
>> Sreenivasan: BORN JANUARY 17,
1942, CASSIUS MARCELLUS CLAY,
JR., GREW UP IN LOUISVILLE,
KENTUCKY.
HE LEARNED TO FIGHT AT AN EARLY
AGE, SEEKING VENGEANCE FOR A
STOLEN BICYCLE, AND HE PILED UP
AWARDS AS A YOUNG BOXER.
IN THE 1960 ROME OLYMPICS, CLAY
STOPPED A POLISH FIGHTER TO TAKE
THE LIGHT-HEAVYWEIGHT GOLD.
BUT RETURNING HOME TO SEGREGATED
LOUISVILLE, HE WAS DENIED
SERVICE AT A WHITES-ONLY
RESTAURANT, AND THREW HIS
OLYMPIC MEDAL INTO THE OHIO
RIVER.
DESPITE THAT FRUSTRATION, CLAY
LANDED A SPONSORSHIP DEAL THE
SAME YEAR, AND WON 19 STRAIGHT
PROFESSIONAL BOUTS.
THE PERFECT MARK EARNED HIM THE
SHOT AT LISTON FOR THE
HEAVYWEIGHT TITLE, AT JUST 22
YEARS OLD.
>> I WHOOPED HIM SO BAD HE HAD
TO GO TO THE HOSPITAL.
AND I'M STILL PRETTY.
WHATCHA GOING TO SAY ABOUT THAT?
HUH?!
>> Sreenivasan: CLAY WAS ALREADY
KNOWN AS "THE LOUISVILLE LIP"
FOR HIS OUTLANDISH SELF-
PROMOTION, EVEN WRITING LYRICS
ABOUT HIMSELF, AS ROCK NEWMAN
RECALLED:
>> "THIS IS THE LEGEND OF
CASSIUS CLAY
THE MOST BEAUTIFUL FIGHTER IN
THE WORLD TODAY
HE TALKS A GREAT DEAL, AND
BRAGS INDEED-Y
OF A MUSCULAR PUNCH THAT'S
INCREDIBLY SPEED-Y
THIS KID FIGHTS GREAT; HE'S
GOT SPEED AND ENDURANCE
IF YOU SIGN TO FIGHT HIM, YOU
BETTER RAISE YOUR INSURANCE.
AHHH, RUMBLE, YOUNG MAN, RUMBLE.
>> Sreenivasan: NEWMAN IS AN EX-
BOXING PROMOTER WHO WENT ON TO
HOST A PUBLIC TV TALK SHOW IN
WASHINGTON.
>> HE WAS SO PHYSICALLY GIFTED,
WITH BLINDING, LIGHTNING-LIKE
SPEED FOR A HEAVYWEIGHT FIGHTER.
HE DID MOST THINGS WRONG
TECHNICALLY IN THE RING, BUT HE
COULD GET AWAY WITH IT BECAUSE
OF HIS BLINDING SPEED AND HIS
SUPERIOR REFLEXES.
>> Sreenivasan: CLAY BASKED IN
THE BOXING SPOTLIGHT, BUT HE WAS
ALSO UNDERGOING MOMENTOUS
CHANGES OUTSIDE THE RING.
EARLIER, HE HAD MET MALCOLM X,
THE BLACK NATIONALIST LEADER
AND-- AT THE TIME-- SPOKESMAN
FOR THE NATION OF ISLAM.
AFTER THE LISTON FIGHT, CLAY
OFFICIALLY JOINED THE NATION
AND CHANGED HIS NAME TO CASSIUS
X.
SOON, THE GROUP'S LEADER, ELIJAH
MUHAMMAD, RENAMED HIM AGAIN AS
MUHAMMAD ALI.
>> CASSIUS?
>> YOU KNOW MY NEW NAME, WHY DO
YOU KEEP CALLING ME THAT?
>> WILL YOUR NEXT FIGHT BE
BILLED AS CASSIUS CLAY OR AS
MUHAMMAD ALI?
>> MUHAMMAD ALI!
>> ON ALL THE FIGHTS?
>> YES, SIR!
>> Sreenivasan: ALI'S RELIGIOUS
CONVERSION AND OUTSPOKEN VIEWS
MADE HIM A LIGHTNING ROD IN THE
TURMOIL OF 1960s AMERICA, BUT
HIS BOXING DOMINANCE CONTINUED.
IN 1965, HE FACED OFF AGAINST
LISTON AGAIN, IN LEWISTON,
MAINE.
THIS TIME, THE FIGHT LASTED LESS
THAN TWO MINUTES.
AS LISTON LAY ON THE MAT, ALI
STOOD OVER HIM, TAUNTING HIM, IN
WHAT BECAME AN ICONIC IMAGE.
QUESTIONS SWIRLED ABOUT WHETHER
LISTON THREW THE FIGHT, BUT ALI
WAVED ASIDE ALL DOUBTS WITH
WHAT BECAME HIS SIGNATURE
PHRASE:
>> AIN'T THAT BEAUTIFUL?
FLOAT LIKE A BUTTERFLY, STING
LIKE A BEE, THAT'S WHAT I'M
SAYING.
>> Srinivasan : THEN, AS ALI
ENTERED HIS PRIME, THE
ESCALATING WAR IN VIETNAM
CONFRONTED HIM WITH AN ENTIRELY
DIFFERENT OPPONENT-- THE UNITED
STATES GOVERNMENT.
HE WAS DRAFTED IN 1967, BUT
CLAIMED CONSCIENTIOUS OBJECTOR
STATUS.
>> WHY SHOULD ME AND OTHER SO-
CALLED NEGROES GO 10,000 MILES
AWAY FROM HOME HERE IN AMERICA
TO DROP BOMBS AND BULLETS ON
OTHER INNOCENT BROWN PEOPLE
WHO'VE NEVER BOTHERED US?
I WILL SAY DIRECTLY, NO, I WILL
NOT GO.
>> Sreenivasan: THE JUSTICE
DEPARTMENT RULED THE OBJECTION
WAS POLITICAL, NOT RELIGIOUS,
AND ALI WAS STRIPPED OF HIS
TITLE AND DID NOT FIGHT AGAIN
FOR 3.5 YEARS.
HE ALSO FACED A POTENTIAL PRISON
TERM BUT REMAINED FREE ON
APPEAL.
>> I DON'T WORRY ABOUT JAIL.
I BELIEVE IN ALLAH.
I BELIEVE IN ELIJAH MUHAMMAD AS
THE MESSENGER OF GOD, AND MANY
GREAT MEN HAVE TO GO TO JAIL AND
SO I DON'T PAY NO ATTENTION TO
IT.
IF THE TIME COMES, I'LL JUST
HAVE TO GO.
>> Sreenivasan: BY 1970, WITH
THE ANTI-WAR MOVEMENT AT A
CRESCENDO, BOXING AUTHORITIES
ALLOWED ALI TO RETURN TO THE
RING.
THAT SET UP A MATCH WITH THE MAN
WHO'D CLAIMED THE HEAVYWEIGHT
TITLE IN HIS ABSENCE-- JOE
FRAZIER.
THEIR BOUT AT MADISON SQUARE
GARDEN IN MARCH 1971 WAS BILLED
AS "THE FIGHT OF THE CENTURY,"
BUT THE LONG LAYOFF HAD ROBBED
ALI OF HIS SPEED.
>> MUHAMMAD ALI HAS NEVER TAKEN
SUCH A BATTERING.
>> Sreenivasan: FRAZIER KEPT THE
TITLE AFTER 15 GRUELING ROUNDS.
WITHIN MONTHS, THOUGH, ALI
SCORED A MAJOR LEGAL VICTORY
WHEN THE U.S. SUPREME COURT
UPHELD HIS CONSCIENTIOUS
OBJECTOR CLAIM AND WIPED AWAY
HIS PRISON SENTENCE.
FREED OF ALL OBSTACLES, HE
LAUNCHED A RISE BACK TO BOXING
PROMINENCE, CULMINATING IN
KINSHASA, ZAIRE, 1974, AND THE
FIGHT DUBBED "THE RUMBLE IN THE
JUNGLE."
ALI FACED THE YOUNGER, HARD-
HITTING GEORGE FOREMAN, WHO HAD
BEATEN FRAZIER.
>> ROUND 1: THE HEAVYWEIGHT
CHAMPIONSHIP OF THE WORLD AT
STAKE.
>> Sreenivasan: THIS TIME, HE
USED A STRATEGY HE NAMED "ROPE-
A-DOPE" TO WEAR OUT FOREMAN.
>> THE PUNCHES AREN'T DOING ANY
DAMAGE, THOUGH!
>> Sreenivasan: IT WORKED.
LATE IN THE 8th ROUND, ALI
LANDED A COMBINATION THAT SENT
FOREMAN TO THE MAT, AND ONCE
AGAIN, HE WAS CHAMPION.
>> I TOLD YOU, ALL OF MY
CRITICS, I TOLD YOU ALL THAT I
WAS THE GREATEST OF ALL TIME
WHEN I BEAT SONNY LISTON.
I TOLD YOU TODAY I'M STILL THE
GREATEST OF ALL TIME.
>> THE NATURE OF THIS FIGHT!
>> Sreenivasan: LESS THAN A YEAR
LATER, IN THE PHILIPPINES, ALI
WAS BACK IN THE RING WITH
FRAZIER FOR THE REMATCH CALLED
THE "THRILLA IN MANILA."
THIS TIME, THE CHAMPION TOOK A
BEATING BUT FINALLY WON ON A
TECHNICAL KNOCKOUT IN 14 ROUNDS.
AFTER THAT, ALI LOST THE
HEAVYWEIGHT CHAMPIONSHIP TO LEON
SPINKS IN FEBRUARY 1978, THEN
RECLAIMED IT ONE MORE TIME
BEFORE LOSING HIS FINAL FIGHT IN
1981.
HE RETIRED FROM BOXING AT THE
AGE OF 39 WITH A RECORD OF 56-5.
POET AND AUTHOR NIKKI GIOVANNI
KNEW ALI WELL:
>> ALI WAS NOT A POLITICIAN, HE
HAD NO AMBITION IN THAT WAY.
HE WAS AN ATHLETE AND HE SHOWN
ALL THE ATHLETES-- HE WAS AN
ATHLETE WHO SAID, "NO, IT
DOESN'T MATTER WHAT YOU ALL
THINK ABOUT ME OR WHAT YOU SAY.
IT DOESN'T MATTER, YOUR PRAISE.
I NEED TO STAND FOR SOMETHING."
AND HE'S DONE THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: THREE YEARS INTO
RETIREMENT, ALI REVEALED HE HAD
PARKINSON'S DISEASE.
BUT HE STAYED ACTIVE DESPITE
HIS SYMPTOMS.
>> THANK ALL OF YOU FOR YOUR
SUPPORT AND FOLLOWING ME OVER
THE YEARS IN BOXING.
>> Sreenivasan: IN 1990, HE
VISITED IRAQ TO HELP WIN THE
RELEASE OF 14 U.S. HOSTAGES FROM
SADDAM HUSSEIN.
SIX YEARS LATER, HE TOOK CENTER
STAGE ONCE AGAIN, LIGHTING THE
OLYMPIC FLAME AT THE SUMMER
GAMES IN ATLANTA AMID A SEA OF
FLASHBULBS.
AND IN 2005, PRESIDENT GEORGE W.
BUSH AWARDED HIM THE MEDAL OF
FREEDOM.
EVEN IN OLD AGE, MUHAMMAD ALI
REMAINED A LARGER-THAN-LIFE
FIGURE AS THE SUBJECT OF MOVIES
AND DOCUMENTARIES, COMMERCIALS
AND POSTERS.
THESE DAYS, HIS LEGACY LIVES ON
IN GYMS AROUND THE COUNTRY,
AMONG YOUNG FIGHTERS AND THEIR
TRAINERS.
>> FIRST THING YOUR COACHES TELL
YOU ABOUT HIM AND START LOOKING
AT HIS SKILL AND TO TRY TO PICK
UP THINGS IN THE RING, BUT THERE
WAS MORE TO ALI MORE THAN JUST
BOXING-- PEOPLE LOVE HIM AND
MAKE MOVIES OF HIM.
IT'S FOR A REASON.
>> THE NAME ITSELF IS SYNONYMOUS
WITH BOXING.
ALI-- BOXING.
BOXING-- ALI.
AND I DOUBT VERY SERIOUSLY IN
OUR LIFETIME THAT WE WILL EVER
SEE ANOTHER ONE LIKE HIM.
>> Sreenivasan: MUHAMMAD ALI WAS
74 YEARS OLD.
TO DISCUSS THE LIFE AND TIMES OF
MUHAMMAD ALI,"SPORTS
ILLUSTRATED" WRITER TIM LAYDEN
JOINS ME NOW FROM HARTFORD,
CONNECTICUT.
LAYDEN WROTE THE LAST "SPORTS
ILLUSTRATED" COVER STORY ON ALI,
PUBLISHED LAST YEAR.
ALI WILL APPEAR ON THE
MAGAZINE'S COVER FOR THE 40th
TIME NEXT WEEK.
TIM, YOU HAD THE THE GOOD
FORTUNE OF MEETING HIM NOT TOO
LONG AGO.
IS IT POSSIBLE TO OVERESTIMATE
THE IMPACT MUHAMMAD ALI HAD?
>> I THINK BACK TO WHEN I SAW
HIM, WHICH WAS IN OCTOBER, IN
LOUISVILLE.
HIS WIFE, LONNIE, GAVE ME SOME
ACCESS TO MUHAMMAD IN ORDER TO
WRITE THE STORY I DID IN "SPORTS
ILLUSTRATED," AND AT THAT POINT,
REALLY, I VIEW ALI'S INFLUENCE
OVER THE COURSE OF HIS LIFE
THROUGH THE PRISM OF THE PEOPLE
THAT MET WITH HIM THAT NIGHT.
IT WAS A SMALL GROUP OF PEOPLE
AT A PRIVATE FUNCTION THAT WERE
ALLOWED TO MEET WITH HIM, AND
THEY WERE OF ALL AGES, BOTH
GENDERS, MANY DIFFERENT RACES.
AND EVERYBODY WAS MOVED TO SOME
EMOTIONAL LEVEL THAT YOU
WOULDN'T NORMALLY SEE-- TEARS,
LAUGHTER, JUST TO SEE THE WAY
THAT HE TOUCHED PEOPLE AT THE
AGE OF 74 AT THE TIME, AND IT
WAS JUST OVERWHELMING.
AND TO THINK THAT, REALLY, HE
HAD BEEN OUT OF THE PUBLIC EYE
FOR 20 YEARS AT THAT POINT,
REALLY, EVEN LONGER-- 32 SINCE
HE HAD BEEN DIAGNOSED WITH
PARKINSON'S.
I FOUND IT HARD TO WRAP MY ARMS
AROUND IT THAT NIGHT AND THAT
WAS A SMALL MICROCOSM OF WHAT
HIS ENTIRE LIFE HAS BEEN.
>> Sreenivasan: WHAT IS IT
ABOUT HIM THAT MADE PEOPLE
ACROSS GENERATION LOOK UP TO HIM
AS A HERO?
>> I THINK THAT HE IS TO PEOPLE
ALMOST DEPENDS ON WHO THAT
PERSON IS AND HOW OLD THAT
PERSON IS AND WHEN THAT PERSON
CAME INTO CONTACT WITH ALI,
EITHER PERSONALLY OR JUST
THROUGH IMAGES ON A TELEVISION
SCREEN OR SOMEWHERE ELSE.
I THINK, OBVIOUSLY, TO A
GENERATION OF BOXING FANS IN THE
60S AND 70s, HE'S ONE OF THE
GREATEST ATHLETES IN HISTORY.
TO THE AFRICAN AMERICAN
COMMUNITY OF THE 60s, HE IS A
REPRESENTATION OF THE SOCIAL
BATTLE THAT THEY WERE INVOLVED
IN AT THE TIME AND ARE STILL
INVOLVED IN TODAY.
TO PEOPLE THAT ARE ATTUNED TO
POLITICAL SOCIETY IN AMERICA,
HIS STANCE AGAINST THE VIETNAM
WAR AT THAT SAME TIME WAS HUGELY
SIGNIFICANT, AND EVENTUALLY
CONFIRMED BY THE SUPREME COURT
OF AMERICA.
AND THEN I THINK AS ALI GOT
OLDER-- AND, OBVIOUSLY, WAS IN
AN IMMENSE BATTLE WITH
PARKINSON'S DISEASE, AND YET
REFUSED TO SURRENDER TO IT-- I
THINK THAT PEOPLE BECAME
EMPATHETIC TO WHAT HE WAS DOING
AND ADMIRING OF HIS COURAGE
AND HIS DIGNITY IN THE FACE OF A
DEBILITATING ILLNESS THAT IN
MANY WAYS HE BROUGHT UPON
HIMSELF WITH THE COURAGE FOR
WHICH HE CHEERED FOR HIM IN THE
RING.
I THINK IT COMES DOWN TO WHO YOU
ARE AND WHEN YOU KNEW ALI.
THAT'S WHY HE TOUCHED SO MANY
PEOPLE.
>> Sreenivasan: THERE'S A
YOUNGER GENERATION OF PEOPLE WHO
PROBABLY ONLY KNOW THIS GUY AS
THE ONE WHO LIT THAT OLYMPIC
TORCH SO FAMOUSLY.
THE TYPE OF STANCES AND
POSITIONS HE TOOK AT THE TIME
THAT HE TOOK THEM, IT'S ALMOST
UNIMAGINABLE TO THINK OF AN
ATHLETE THAT IS THAT DOMINANT
IN A SPORT TODAY, WITH ALL THE
CORPORATE BACKING THAT MIGHT
COME WITH IT AND ALL OF THE
MONEY, TAKING HUGE POSITIONS ON
SOCIALLY CONTROVERSIAL ISSUES OF
THE DAY.
>> IT'S ALMOST IMPOSSIBLE TO
CONVEY THAT TO AN AUDIENCE OF
YOUNG PEOPLE WHO MIGHT BE FANS
OF A CAM NEWTON, OR STEPH CURRY,
OR LEBRON JAMES, OR BRYCE
HARPER, TO MAKE THEM UNDERSTAND
HOW MUCH MUHAMMAD ALI PUT AT
RISK IN THE 1960s, NOT ONLY BY
REFUSING INDUCTION INTO THE
SELECTIVE SERVICE BUT ALSO BY
HIS CONVERSION TO THE NATION OF
ISLAM, TO THE MUSLIM FAITH,
AT A TIME WHEN THAT WAS A HUGELY
UNPOPULAR STANCE AS WELL.
HE ENJOYED FAME AND CELEBRITY
AND MONEY AND HE PUT THOSE
THINGS AT RISK.
FOR THE MODERN ATHLETE, REALLY,
IT IS ABOUT THEIR PERFORMANCE ON
THE FIELD BUT EVERY BIT AS MUCH
IT'S ABOUT FURTHERING AND
BUTTRESSING THE BRAND THAT THEIR
NAME REPRESENTS.
AND, OBVIOUSLY, ANY
CONTROVERSIAL POSITION IS GOING
TO PUT THAT AT RISK, AND THEY
WOULD NEVER DO THAT.
>> Sreenivasan: TIM LAYDEN OF
"SPORTS ILLUSTRATED" JOINING US
FROM HARTFORD, CONNECTICUT,
TODAY, THANKS SO MUCH.
>> YOU'RE WELCOME.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PENTAGON
SAID TODAY NINE SOLDIERS DIED
WHEN A VEHICLE CARRYING THEM IN
FLOODED WATERS OUTSIDE FORT
HOOD, TEXAS, OVERTURNED IN A
STREAM ON THURSDAY.
AT LEAST SEVEN OTHER PEOPLE HAVE
DIED AS TORRENTIAL RAINS DELUGED
HUNDREDS OF HOMES IN CENTRAL
TEXAS DURING THE PAST WEEK.
OVERSEAS, AFTER A WEEK OF HEAVY
RAINS, PARTS OF GERMANY,
ROMANIA AND BELGIUM ARE ALL
EXPERIENCING HEAVY FLOODING.
THE SEINE RIVER PEAKED AT 20
FEET ABOVE NORMAL BEFORE
STARTING TO GO DOWN TODAY.
THE FLOODS CLOSED STREETS, TRAIN
STATIONS AND POPULAR
ATTRACTIONS IN PARIS, WHILE
FLOOD WATERS IN CENTRAL FRANCE
WASHED UP AGAINST THE WALLS OF
THIS 500-YEAR-OLD CASTLE IN THE
LOIRE VALLEY.
THE FEDERAL RAIL ADMINISTRATION
SAYS THERE IS NO EVIDENCE OF ANY
OIL LEAKING INTO THE COLUMBIA
RIVER, NEAR PORTLAND, OREGON,
WHERE A 96-CAR TRAIN CARRYING
CRUDE OIL FROM NORTH DAKOTA
DERAILED YESTERDAY.
BUT THE DIRECTOR OF WASHINGTON
STATE'S DEPARTMENT OF ECOLOGY
SAYS IT IS INVESTIGATING A SMALL
OIL SHEEN ON THE RIVER.
OVERNIGHT, FIRE CREWS
EXTINGUISHED THE BLAZE THAT
BEGAN AFTER 11 CARS OF THE UNION
PACIFIC TRAIN DERAILED, IN THE
FIRST MAJOR OIL TRAIN ACCIDENT
IN THE U.S. THIS YEAR.
AUTHORITIES TODAY WERE EXPECTED
TO LIFT THE EVACUATION ORDER FOR
A QUARTER MILE AROUND THE
ACCIDENT SITE.
DEFENSE SECRETARY ASH CARTER
SAYS THE U.S. WILL MAINTAIN AND
EVEN EXPAND ITS MILITARY
FOOTPRINT IN THE ASIA-PACIFIC,
AND THAT THE U.S. WILL CONTINUE
TO GUARANTEE SECURITY IN THE
REGION.
SPEAKING AT AN INTERNATIONAL
SECURITY CONFERENCE IN SINGAPORE
TODAY, CARTER CALLED ON CHINA TO
JOIN WHAT HE DUBBED A
"PRINCIPLED SECURITY NETWORK,"
BUT HE ALSO CRITICIZED CHINA FOR
BUILDING UP ITS MILITARY REACH
ON ISLANDS IN THE SOUTH CHINA
SEA.
>> AS A RESULT, CHINA'S ACTIONS
IN THE SOUTH CHINA SEA ARE
ISOLATING IT AT A TIME WHEN THE
ENTIRE REGION IS COMING TOGETHER
AND NETWORKING.
UNFORTUNATELY, IF THESE ACTIONS
CONTINUE, CHINA COULD END UP
ERECTING A GREAT WALL OF SELF-
ISOLATION.
>> Sreenivasan: A TOP CHINESE
OFFICIAL SAID ANY ATTEMPTS TO
ISOLATE CHINA WOULD FAIL, AND
THE U.S. SHOULD SCALE BACK ITS
"PROVOCATIVE" MILITARY EXERCISES
AND PATROLS.
POPE FRANCIS IS TAKING ACTION TO
HOLD BISHOPS MORE ACCOUNTABLE
FOR PUNISHING PEDOPHILE PRIESTS.
TODAY, THE POPE ISSUED A DECREE
THAT BISHOPS WHO MISHANDLE SEX
ABUSE COMPLAINTS BY CATHOLIC
PARISHIONERS COULD BE REMOVED
FROM THEIR POSTS.
IN PROCLAIMING THE NEW POLICY,
THE POPE ABANDONED AN IDEA OF A
VATICAN TRIBUNAL TO HANDLE
INSTANCES OF COVER-UP OR
NEGLIGENCE, WHICH HE HAD
PROPOSED ONLY LAST YEAR.
THE HEAD OF "SNAP," THE MAIN
GROUP FOR U.S. VICTIMS OF PRIEST
SEX ABUSE, SAYS HE'S "HIGHLY
SKEPTICAL" THE DECREE WILL WORK
BECAUSE IT'S JUST ANOTHER
"UNTESTED" PROCESS.
HE CALLED ON THE CHURCH SIMPLY
TO TURN OVER RECORDS OF PRIEST
SEX ABUSE TO LAW ENFORCEMENT
OFFICIALS.
SEE HOW MUHAMMAD ALI IS BEING
REMEMBERED ACROSS THE GLOBE WITH
TRIBUTES FROM PRESIDENT OBAMA,
MIKE TYSON AND OTHERS.
VISIT US ONLINE AT
www.pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: VENEZUELA HAS
THE WORLD'S LARGEST RESERVES OF
OIL, BUT WITH THE PRICE OF OIL
IN A FREE FALL, THE COUNTRY'S
ECONOMY IS SHRINKING, AND THE
SOUTH AMERICAN NATION OF
30 MILLION PEOPLE IS SUFFERING
FROM SEVERE SHORTAGES OF FOOD,
CONSUMER GOODS AND SERVICES
LIKE HOSPITAL CARE.
SOME CRITICS SAY VENEZUELA'S
PROBLEMS STEM FROM SOCIALIST
POLICIES AND WANT A REFERENDUM
TO REMOVE PRESIDENT NICHOLAS
MADURO FROM OFFICE.
"NEW YORK TIMES" REPORTER
NICHOLAS CASEY IS BASED IN THE
VENEZUELAN CAPITAL OF CARACAS,
BUT TODAY HE JOINS ME HERE IN
THE STUDIO TO DISCUSS THE
CRISIS.
FIRST OF ALL, LET'S GIVE SOME
PEOPLE IN THE AUDIENCE A KIND OF
SNAPSHOT OF WHAT DAY-TO-DAY LIFE
IS LIKE THERE.
IN SOME OF YOUR STORIES YOU HAVE
KIND OF PAINTED IT IN A SOCIETY
THAT IS LOSING THE RULE OF LAW.
>> IT IS.
IF YOU GO OUTSIDE IN ANY
NEIGHBORHOOD, ANY CITY OR TOWN
IN VENEZUELA NOW, YOU'RE GOING
TO SEE HUGE LINES OF PEOPLE
TRYING TO GET FOOD.
THERE ARE PEOPLE WHO ARE LINING
UP STARTING AT 5:00 A.M. IN THE
MORNING TO TRY TO FIND FOOD.
VENEZUELA DOESN'T HAVE ANY
LIGHTS RIGHT NOW BECAUSE
THERE'S VERY LITTLE ELECTRICITY.
BIG PARTS OF CARACAS DON'T HAVE
WATER IN IT ANYMORE.
MANY OF THE MOST BASIC
GOVERNMENT SERVICES HAVE JUST
SUDDENLY VANISHED.
>> Sreenivasan: SO CARACAS--
WE'RE TALKING ABOUT A MAJOR
METRO CITY ON THE PLANET.
WHEN YOU TALK ABOUT THOUSANDS OF
PEOPLE WITHOUT WATER, WHAT ARE
THEY DOING?
WHERE DO THEY GET IT?
I MEAN, WATER AND FOOD ARE
THINGS THAT YOU NEED TO LIVE.
>> PEOPLE ARE BASICALLY FIGURING
OUT HOW TO HACK THIS COUNTRY,
AND PEOPLE ARE BECOMING, LIKE,
INCREASINGLY CREATIVE AS TO HOW
TO GET AROUND THINGS RIGHT NOW.
TO FIND BASIC MEDICINES AT THIS
POINT, BECAUSE YOU DON'T HAVE
THEM IN MANY HOSPITALS OR
PHARMACIES, PEOPLE ARE TRYING TO
SEARCH FOR THEM FROM BLACK
MARKET DEALERS WHO ARE PUTTING
UP SIGNS IN HOSPITALS SAYING,
"IF YOU CALL ME, I CAN GIVE YOU
A GOOD PRICE FOR ANTIBIOTICS."
THAT'S WHAT IT'S COMING TO.
>> Sreenivasan: ONE OF THE
STORIES THAT YOU FILED THAT WAS
PROBABLY THE HARDEST TO SEE WAS
WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE INSIDE A
HOSPITAL.
I MEAN, YOU WENT THROUGH PRETTY
MUCH HALLWAYS THAT LOOK LIKE A
WAR ZONE.
>> IT DOES, AND I'VE BEEN TO
REPORT IN WAR ZONES LIKE GAZA
AND HAVEN'T SEEN A PLACE THAT
LOOKED QUITE LIKE THAT.
LOOK, IN THE MIDDLE EAST, WHEN
THERE IS A WAR GOING ON, THERE
ARE A LOT OF AID ORGANIZATIONS
THAT ARE TRYING TO FILL IN SOME
OF THESE GAPS.
IN VENEZUELA, THE GOVERNMENT HAS
SAID THERE'S NO PROBLEM, SO
PEOPLE WHO ARE TRYING TO BRING
IN MEDICINES ARE BEING TOLD NO.
AND THESE HOSPITALS, THEY LOOK
LIKE-- THEY LOOK LIKE HELL ON
EARTH, BASICALLY.
YOU'RE SEEING PEOPLE ON GURNEYS
AND ON THE FLOOR IN THEIR OWN
BLOOD.
ONE OF THE HOSPITALS THAT WE
WENT TO, THERE HAD BEEN A NUMBER
OF NEWBORN INFANTS WHO HAD DIED
THE DAY BEFORE WHEN THERE WAS
ALSO A POWER OUTAGE.
THE DOCTORS HAD TO TRY TO USE,
YOU KNOW, THEIR HANDS AND, LIKE,
GIVE RESPIRATION TO A NUMBER OF
BABIES THAT WERE ON VENTILATORS.
THERE WAS ONE HOSPITAL THAT WE
WENT TO WHERE THE SURGEONS HAD
TOLD US BECAUSE THERE WAS NO
WATER IN THE HOSPITAL, THEIR
PUMP SYSTEM HAD BROKEN, THAT
THEY WERE HAVING TO USE SELTZER
WATER BETWEEN SURGERIES TO CLEAN
THEIR HANDS.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE A
CONCERN THAT VENEZUELA COULD BE
A TOTAL FAILED STATE, THERE
COULD BE CIVIL UNREST?
>> THAT'S THE REASON WHY THE
U.S., THE O.A.S. NOW, A GROWING
NUMBER OF COUNTRIES ARE SAYING
THAT VENEZUELA NEEDS TO DO
SOMETHING BECAUSE WHEN YOU HAVE
THESE LARGE LINES OF PEOPLE
GATHERED EVERY DAY FOR FOOD, YOU
DON'T HAVE MANY STEPS FROM THAT
TO HAVING A MOB THAT'S ANGRY AND
THAT IS THE BASIS FOR CIVIL
UNREST.
AND IT'S A HUGE CONCERN RIGHT
NOW OF WHAT MIGHT HAPPEN THIS
YEAR.
>> Sreenivasan: NICHOLAS CASEY
OF THE "NEW YORK TIMES," THANKS
SO MUCH FOR JOINING US.
>> THANKS.
>> Sreenivasan: FINALLY, IN
THE FRENCH OPEN, WOMEN'S SINGLES
FINAL TODAY, TOP-SEEDED SERENA
WILLIAMS WAS UPSET IN STRAIGHT
SETS BY FOURTH-SEED GARBINE
MUGURUZA OF SPAIN.
WILLIAMS WAS TRYING TO EQUAL
STEFFI GRAF'S RECORD OF 22 MAJOR
TOURNAMENT TITLES.
AND IN THE MEN'S DOUBLES FINAL,
AMERICANS BOB AND MIKE BRYAN
WERE DENIED A 17th GRAND
SLAM TROPHY.
THEY LOST TO A SPANISH DUO IN
THREE SETS.
THE BRYAN BROTHERS STILL HAVE
WON MORE PROFESSIONAL
TOURNAMENTS THAN ANY OTHER TEAM
IN HISTORY.
THAT'S ALL FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
HAVE A GOOD NIGHT.